All the generations of the entire town
like everyone is here.
>> Oh, it's going off.
They told me I was coming to film some
ancient Greek traditions. This is uh
this is not exactly what I had in mind.
My name is Professor Hannah Fry, a
mathematician and writer with a lifelong
habit of following my curiosity,
especially when things are deeply
deliciously interesting.
>> Kitchen yoga for you.
>> Dianisis would approve.
>> Some people travel to see the world. I
travel to question the forces that shape
entire nations.
>> Welcome to South Korea. I wanted to come
here for their optimal urban planning.
It sort of feels quite chaotic. I'll be
honest with you.
>> I want to meet the people with
unexpected stories to tell. I cannot
imagine going through that as a young
boy. No.
>> And dig up the peculiar and wonderful
treasures that reveal what a country is
made of.
I'm looking at it and thinking, "What
beautiful geometry."
>> This is my way to make sense of what
makes our world go round.
Even if you've never set foot on Greek
soil, trust me, it's already had a big
influence on your life. This is the
country that gave us democracy,
philosophy, modern science, the
Olympics. I mean, I could go on.
These days, Greece is better known for
its island hopping, its lush olive
groves, and some of the best food the
Mediterranean has to offer.
>> Yamas.
>> What was it about this sun soaked land
that meant so many big ideas took hold?
And how much of that legacy still shapes
Greece today?
Not not to be a peasant, but um see that
that's a Cartisian plane wasn't invented
until about 2,000 years after
Pythagoras. But who am I to mention it?
Any holiday destination where you get
mathematicians on the souvenirs. I like
this one. Is my kind of country.
>> Do you know who he is?
>> Of course, it's Uklid.
>> He's my favorite. He's my personal
favorite.
Some of the greatest minds in history
now available in fridge magnet form.
Okay, I want to buy one of them, please.
Of course.
Naturally, I want to start exploring
where so many of their revolutionary
ideas were born. And so, I'm kicking off
my journey in Athens, Europe's oldest
capital and once the intellectual
powerhouse of the ancient world.
These are the streets which have rung
for millennia with the sound of sandals,
debates, and probably the occasional
falling out over olive oil.
But as life continued below, towering
over the city, rising up from the rock,
was the Pathanon, a temple carved from
stone, jaw-dropping proof of the ancient
Greek commitment to philosophy,
politics, art, and ambition.
I know it's not enough for me to just
tell you that the ancient Greeks were a
big deal. I need to show you. And what
better evidence is there than this
magnificent monument to perfection, the
Pathanon. This was built in about 400
B.CE. And there were other pretty big
buildings around the world at the time,
but none that had their dedication to
symmetry and proportions. Kind of makes
Stonehenge look a bit pathetic, don't
you think?
The Pathon is one of the most popular
tourist spots in Greece. Millions visit
every year. And while most of them come
here to soak up the history or marvel at
the awe inspiring architecture, I'm
looking at it and thinking,
excellent maths.
What beautiful geometry. Because hidden
at the heart of this temple is an
ancient optical illusion.
When you look at the pathon from here,
kind of looks like everything's
straight, right? So, it's sort of a very
straightforward building, but there are
no straight lines in the pathon because
the base is not flat. It arches upwards
towards the middle and down at the ends.
It's as if the whole thing sits on the
surface of a sphere. And just to show
off, all the pillars lean in towards the
center ever so slightly. And they're all
shaped a little bit like a Coca-Cola
bottle, skinny at the top, um, with a
kind of bulge and then big at the
bottom. Up until the 19th century, some
thought it must be a fluke. That flaws
in its design had walked the whole
thing. But no, every curve was
deliberate.
The ancient Greeks understood something
we're still catching up to. Your brain
expects things to sag under gravity. And
so if a structure is too straight, it
looks like it's bending. Their solution
was to build it subtly curved so that it
looks straight. In other words, to make
it look perfect, they had to cheat your
eyes.
Of course, it's one thing to dream up a
design this clever, but building it
without either modern tools or a
calculator, that's something else.
To understand more about how they
managed it, I'm spending a few hours on
the job with one of the restoration team
tasked with restoring the pathonon to
its former glory. A second generation
stonemason with quite possibly the most
Greek name imaginable. Is your real name
Adonis?
>> Yes.
>> Really? Amazing.
>> Over the millennia, this building has
been shaken by earthquakes, raided by
lutters, and blown up by bombs. And
what's left is a 70,000piece jigsaw
puzzle to solve and restore and no
picture on the box. To reinstate each of
the 69 columns, Adonis and the rest of
the team need to cut fresh marble to fit
seamlessly around the ancient stone.
>> Oh, I see. So you have the new stuff
like wrapping around.
>> Yes.
>> That's complicated.
>> Very complicated. Modern machinery is
used for the rough shaping, but when it
comes to the fine details, it's chisels
and hammers, just like the original
craftsman used two and a half millennia
ago. Oh my god, this is so small. Look
at this. Compared to the size of the
pot,
>> if you were just using the ancient
techniques, just you just the chisel,
and you've got to make one whole bit.
>> Just one?
>> Yeah.
>> One month.
for just for one bit. Okay.
>> But with the electric tools, it is one
week.
>> Can I do a bit?
>> Uh allowed.
>> Don't tell anyone. We won't tell anyone.
>> Okay.
>> Please let me a chisel. God.
>> Maybe you can try here.
>> An easy bit.
>> It's very safe. And after if you want
first this and after like this.
So you can uh
>> Okay.
>> Hold the tool strongly. Do not damage
the UNESCO World Heritage site
>> like this.
>> Yes.
>> Congratulations. I think you'll learn
fast because one mistake you cannot
replace.
>> I um am glad that I haven't ruined it.
This is one of the most impressive
buildings.
>> Mhm.
>> In the whole of the world. Why did it
happen here?
>> They work clever. But it is not only
this. All these marbles comes from this
mountain. It is hard as they need.
>> Uhhuh.
>> To work or to not be very soft.
>> Not too soft, not too hard.
>> Yeah. It is very nice kind of marble. Do
you feel connected to your ancestors?
>> Many times. Yeah.
>> I can touch it.
>> Yeah.
>> I can feel it
>> and I can see what anient worker see.
The idea that what I'm doing now will be
exist
thousand years after me. Maybe I be the
grand grandfather
of uh
>> the next after 500 years, you know.
Beautiful.
>> For Adonis and the millions of tourists
who visit each year, the Pathon is more
than just a monument. It's a portal to
the past, a tangible link to the
brilliant minds who built it. I think
anybody who comes here leaves with the
impression that the Pathon is this
spectacularly beautiful, impressive
thing. But I think that what is even
more impressive, even more beautiful is
what the ancient Greeks did that made
the pathonon possible. Because behind
every column and curve is a radical new
idea that logic can be used to shape the
world around you. The ancient Greeks
didn't just build temples. They built a
whole new way of thinking. One that
would change the course of history
forever.
The Greek's real legacy isn't their
iconic architecture or beautiful
buildings. It's their blueprint for
rational thought. So, as I leave Athens
behind, I want to show you what happened
when the Greek mindset, curiosity,
reason, and a love of asking impossible
questions met the vast unknowns of the
natural world.
Let me tell you the rather excellent
story of the head librarian of
Alexandria, Erosines. Now, um, in a
classic case of ancient Greek banter,
Erosines's contemporaries like to call
him beta to sort of imply that he was
second rate. Strangely enough though, no
one remembers those guys now.
One day, Erositoines heard a story about
a town called Cyen in the south where at
exactly midday on the summer solstice,
there were no shadows on the ground.
Now, most of us, I think, would hear
that and find it interesting and go on
about our day. But on beta got to
thinking because if there were no
shadows at that exact moment, it must
mean that the sun is directly overhead.
which was weird because he'd never
noticed such a phenomenon in the north
in Alexandria.
So he waited for the summer solstice to
roll around again when the sun would be
highest in the sky. And he confirmed
that unlike in Cyen, there were
definitely shadows here in the north.
But how could that possibly make any
sense? How could it be that you have
shadows in Alexandria in the north at
the exact same moment that there are no
shadows in Cyen in the south? If the
earth was flat, then both shadows should
should be the same. And so, Eerosines
realized the only possible explanation
to have shadows in Alexandria at the
same time as there were no shadows in
Cyan is that the world wasn't flat at
all. It was curved.
But beta wasn't done. If the world was
round, Eratines realized he could
calculate exactly how big it was. He
knew the angle of the shadow in
Alexandria. So if he could just work out
the distance to cyan in the south, he
could use triangles and geometry to do
the rest.
Ideally, he could have just sent
somebody off with a camel, but camels
have this nasty habit of getting a bit
bored and wandering off course. And so
he gave somebody one of the worst jobs
in scientific history, the challenge of
pacing out the exact distance between
Alexandria in the north and cyan in the
south. The distance came out as 5,000
stadia, roughly 800 km, which with some
simple arithmetic told Eratosineses that
the circumference of the earth was
approximately 40,000 km.
We now know the circumference of the
earth is 40,075
km,
which isn't bad for old searate beta, is
it?
For the Greeks, maths wasn't about
numbers. It was about ideas, a tool for
revealing the deepest structure of
reality, one elegant principle at a
time. Inevitably, that understanding was
deeply tied to their surroundings. a
dramatic landscape of mountains and
islands.
But maybe something about the geography
of this region helped shape things, too.
If you take a look at a map of Greece,
you'll spot something straight away. A
large portion of it is islands. Around
200 inhabited ones, to be precise,
sweeping an unique arc across the Aian.
And that's because Greece's volcanic
islands sit on a tectonic fault line
beneath the sea.
Now if you compare ancient Greece and
its geography to some of the other
superpowers that were around at the time
like Egypt or Persia, they were kind of
centrally ruled, right? They had a
monarch, they had a king or they had a
pharaoh.
>> Greece's fragmented geography made
central rule almost impossible.
>> So instead, Greece really was a
collection of autonomous city states.
>> They were spread across the mainland and
its many islands. familiar names such as
Athens, Sparta, roads, and thieves
constantly bickering and fighting, but
also bound together by a shared language
and culture.
And that is what makes Greece such an
interesting country based on its
geography. You've got over a thousand
city states that are just about far
enough away from each other to to be
completely autonomous and have their own
identity and yet close enough together
via the sea to be continually fighting
and trading and intermingling with one
another.
>> It turns out that island hopping wasn't
just for the views. It's also now
hardwired into the local genetics.
like in Cree for instance, the the
largest of the islands. What is
interesting about Creian DNA is that you
also see it sprinkled occasionally
across people in the other islands of
the Aian Sea, across the Mediterranean,
up into mainland Europe, and then down
into Egypt and the Levant. This isn't
just true of in and around Cree, by the
way. If you zoom out, you realize that
this was happening all across the
Mediterranean.
These weren't isolated islands, but a
buzzing network of Greek colonies,
constantly trading resources and ideas
with other civilizations.
Those Greek trade routes are just as
busy now as they've always been.
So, I'm leaving the mainland and heading
off to sea, following in the footsteps
of the ancient voyagers.
No Greek holiday is complete without a
trip to one of its idilic islands.
Thousands of passenger fairies
crisscross the Aian, fueling a tourism
industry that makes up almost 20% of
Greece's economy.
I've come to Lavrio, Greece's third
largest passenger port. But I'm not here
for the cruise ships or looking for
cocktails and sun lounges.
I want some good old-fashioned conquest
and philosophy and maybe a little bit
about how Greece's seafaring skill
helped turn it into an ancient
superpower. So, I'm traveling old school
with wind and sails. Catching a lift
with local skipper Lucas, who still
navigates the Aian the traditional way.
>> Lucas, do I have to like ask permission
to come on board? Hello. Hello.
>> Thank you.
Lucas runs a Gian cargo sailing using
wind power to ferry cheese, wine, honey,
and olive oil between the islands.
>> So, we can now undo the road, please.
>> Yes, captain.
>> Do you insist on them calling you
captain?
>> Well, everybody does call me, even if I
don't ask for it.
>> Really?
>> And I'm very happy about this.
>> During the summer months, Lucas invites
tourists aboard to help with his
deliveries. And today I'm the latest
recruit. Underqualified but very
enthusiastic.
>> Very good.
We'll hire you.
>> Lucas's trade route links 25 Greek
islands, allowing small-cale farmers and
producers to share their products with
buyers across the Aian, the same way
Lucas' ancestors were doing millennia
ago.
It's so peaceful.
>> Yeah. You just put up the sails
>> and then I can only hear the waves and
the whistling of the wind
>> the traditional way. I guess if you had
existed on that island, right? And and
then you see this one in the distance.
It's going to be sort of calling you to
go on the water.
>> And that's exactly what happened. The
the circulation in in the Aian was by
sight. you could see the island you go
to and you see the island you left
behind you all the time.
>> I guess that does sort of indicate a
mindset then, right, of like you're
going to be quite adventurous if you're
a people that grew up seeing other
islands in the distance.
>> Yeah, that's why the Greeks became so
good sailors that it was easy and they
were doing it all the time,
>> but also there was stuff to find, I
guess, right? Like particularly where
you are
>> and there was a lot of commerce to do.
>> Yeah. As a matter of fact, Greece became
or Athens mainly became very rich
because of the of the commerce.
>> And since then, Greece's maritime trade
hasn't just survived. It's gone global.
Today, Greek shipping giants control
just over a fifth of the world's
merchant fleet, the largest share of any
nation. And sharing the shipping lanes
with these juggernauts is Lucas, a
living link between Greece's trading
past and present.
But if we're doing this old school, then
we're doing it properly. Full-on ancient
Greek.
>> I thought we could do a bit of
traditional navigation. I brought my
very own astrolab
never travel without it.
>> Great.
>> I mean, that's absolutely not true.
>> So, you're going to tell us where we
are.
>> I'm going to try.
>> Let's see how we get on with the ancient
equivalent of GPS.
First developed by Greek astronomers
around 150 B.CE, the Astrolabe helped
sailors push beyond familiar coastlines,
venturing across open sea to places like
Egypt and as far west as Spain, all by
navigating with nothing but the sun and
the stars. It's based on the idea that
if you were down at the equator at
midday, the sun would be directly
overhead. But if you're at one of the
poles, the sun would be very low in the
sky.
So if you can work out the angle that
the sun is at midday, you can find out
how far north or south you are. A
century after aes measured the earth
with shadows and geometry. The Greeks
turned that logic into tools to expand
their horizons.
So the way this works, right, it's very
clever. It's trying to work out the
angle from uh the vertical. Then you
want to work out where the sun is in the
sky by twizzling this bit and pointing
the needle upwards. Now when you are in
exactly the right point, there's a
little hole in the top here that you
line up with the second hole below. Oh,
okay. That's pretty good. Right, I'm
getting about 46. I think once you've
got the sun's angle above the horizon,
you just need to tweak it slightly for
the time of year. Do the math and voila,
you've got your latitude,
which gets me to I'm going to say 38.
>> Let's verify it's almost 38. 37.7.
>> I mean, the.3
is quite a big difference though in
terms of the actual circumference of the
earth. But I mean, that's pretty good.
>> Yeah. What do you do when it's cloudy?
>> You cannot. It's as simple as that.
>> Okay, obviously your mobile phone could
do a better job. But this is ancient
technology. Navigation from 2,000 years
ago. Armed with just circles, straight
lines, and triangles, the Greeks used
the cosmos to understand the earth and
built tools to exploit it that are small
enough to hold in the palm of your hand,
yet powerful enough to launch voyages
into the unknown.
Ham always wonders what makes the Greeks
so special, like why was it here that
they had this massive intellectual
revolution? I think being on this boat,
it sort of makes it a bit clearer.
Greece found itself at a unique point in
history and place on the planet where
they could reach out in any direction
and find riches on the horizon. And I
don't just mean valuable resources, but
intellectual and cultural riches, too.
It's little wonder that they ended up
with this Voyager mindset still alive in
people like Lucas. And all that Greek
ambition was fueled by something.
So I'm heading south to the very edge of
the Greek archipelago in search of
treasure as vital to the modern Greek
economy as it was to their ancient
ancestors.
Wherever the ancient Greeks went, one
precious resource always traveled with
them. A single commodity that fed their
people, lit their homes, and helped
transform scattered citystates into
thriving powerhouses. A liquid gold that
brought the ancient Greeks time to
think, debate, and build the foundations
of the Western world.
I've come to Cree, Greece's largest
island and the cradle of Europe's
earliest civilization to uncover how the
humble olive helped shape a nation. A
fruit so important to Greek life, it
comes with its own legend.
So the story goes that two of the Greek
gods, Athena and Poseidon, having this
big argument over the naming of a new
city. And Poseidon gets his trident out,
decides to make this really dramatic
move. She conjures up this saltwater
spring which looks amazing, not very
practical. Athena, on the other hand,
she does something much quieter. She
simply plants an olive tree.
But over time, that olive tree becomes
the source of food, of oil, and of wood.
This is a tree that can survive droughts
and storms and wars. And so the people
of the city, they make their choice.
They call their city Athens after
Athena. And the olive tree itself
becomes this real symbol of
perseverance, of endurance, and of
wisdom.
Now, that mythical tree is just a
legend. But this one in Cree is the real
deal. Talk about having roots in the
past. This olive tree is over 4,000
years old. A living, breathing link to
ancient Greece.
And it's not just the trees that have
roots in the past. People like Maria, a
fifth generation olive farmer, still
tend to these ancient beings with the
same care their ancestors did.
>> What does this kind of tree mean to the
people of Greece? It's not just a tree
to you.
>> No, it's not just a tree. It's uh
symbolize our history, our long
relationship with olive oil. It reminds
us our obligation to give it even better
to the next generation. Our tradition is
here in Creed uh when a baby is born.
Yeah. Uh we plant the tree while the
child will grow up the the olive tree
will provide his food.
>> Wait, so do you have your own tree?
>> Yes, I have one.
>> So now it's very emotional to to see the
tree and to know that it has the same
age with you.
>> I really love the idea that that even
after you die,
>> even after everybody who knows you has
died, your tree will still be there.
Yes. Yes.
>> It's really beautiful.
>> It It gives you hope.
>> I've agreed to help out with one of the
busiest periods for olive farmers like
Maria. Pruning season. You know, this is
how my hair goes if I brush it. Olive
trees outnumber people 50 to one on.
They blanket the islands all the way
from the coastline to the highest peaks.
Maria has over 2 and a half thousand
trees in her care. So, yes, help is
welcome.
I'm hoping to learn a few tricks of the
trade from her father Yorcos and
grandfather Males. Have you been doing
this for many years then with these
trees? Really? And then and then you
taught Did he teach you as well?
>> So you're the master.
>> We want an umbrella around the trees in
order to be protected from the sun. Uh,
the main pruning must be done from
upstairs.
>> Okay.
>> In order to watch what you cut.
>> I mean, I noticed there's not a ladder
down the bottom.
>> Okay. Climbing.
>> You will be, you know, a real farmer.
>> Let's do it. I mean, yeah,
>> I'm told the tree Maria's grandfather
has chosen for me is an easy climber.
But let's just say I spent more of my
youth reading books than up trees.
This olive tree is just a baby.
>> Okay, I'm in.
>> Less than a thousand years old and
produces between 3 and 5 L of olive oil
every year.
>> Thank you. Got it.
>> You can see the umbrella shape much
better up here.
>> This one?
>> No.
>> Yes.
>> The one that looks up
>> the go. Oh, just Oops.
>> Don't worry.
>> But then hold on. Do you not get more
olives if you keep up more branches?
>> No. No. No. Because you will not have
enough air and enough sun in order the
branches to flower.
>> Oh, I see. So, there's a balance, right?
>> Balance is the is the the secret.
>> You got it.
>> Yes. It needs strength. Did you had a
good breakfast?
>> Oh, well done.
>> I can see the sky.
There are very few moments
where you get to feel as though you are
doing something that has been the same
way for thousands of years.
>> You do the same thing and it keeps you
provide with food.
>> You love the tree and then it loves you
back.
>> Yes.
>> And this tree's been loved for a
millennium.
>> Exactly.
>> There was a ladder this whole time.
>> Yeah.
>> We wanted to live the the authentic
experience. I'm pretty sure they had
ladders a thousand years ago.
Unbelievable.
Can I give you this?
>> This deep rooted tradition has made
Greece one of the world's top olive oil
producers. A large volume of which comes
from cit. But when it comes to consuming
the stuff, the Greeks are top tier.
They practically bathe in it, getting
through about 20 L per person per year.
>> Yamas.
>> Yamas. Yamas. Thank you for having me.
>> Work hard and now we can eat traditional
food.
>> Beautiful.
From sweet cheese pastries called
khalatsuna to my personal favorite,
kumba, delicious crean donuts.
Everything here is either made with
olive oil or is basically drowning in
it.
There's something very special about
olive farming because it's like this
lineage that goes back like beyond
anything that you could comprehend with
any other kind of farming.
>> It's our tradition. We grow up in olive
groves. We learn to our children how to
respect, how to love olive trees. It
like a legacy for us,
>> I guess, in many ways. Then, although
you might technically own these olive
trees now, it's it's more like you're
their guardians.
>> Yeah, I try. like that.
>> Yes.
>> To pro to protect
>> until they sell it.
>> We hope they don't.
>> I mean, it is pretty amazing that you
have what is essentially an immortal
being in the olive tree. And it's
amazing that you have these people who
who care for them so deeply. But what I
think is really interesting is this
symbiotic relationship
consistent through time between this
this ancient organism and the people who
care for it. Across Greece, you'll find
people tending to history as part of
their daily lives. Here in the olive
groves are the temples in Athens and the
trade routes of the Aia. These aren't
just relics of Greece's past. They're
responsibilities. And some of the most
devoted caretakers are the last people
you might expect.
Greece is a country with an undeniably
rich history. But here's the thing.
History isn't just what happened. It's
what we choose to remember, protect, and
retell.
And there is a reason that the cultural
legacy of ancient Greece endured to
leave such an indelible mark on our
modern world.
I'm heading inland to the breathtaking
landscape of Meteora, where towering
rock formations rise up from the Thesaly
plains.
Meteora means suspended in air. And you
can see why. Here, monasteries look less
built and more precariously balanced on
top of high stone pillars. I was brought
up Catholic, right? So, I feel very at
home in a church. But there is something
that always struck me as sort of unusual
about Greece, right? Because this is a
place that is known for its curiosity,
for its its intellectual exploration,
and yet at the same time it's one of the
most religious countries in all of
Europe. 90% of Greeks, by the way,
identify as Orthodox. And you sort of
think those two things would be in
conflict with one another. You know,
like on the one hand this sort of
unquenchable thirst for proof and then
on the other ask you to sort of believe
and don't question.
Built by a group of monks in the 14th
century with some serious determination
and no fear of heights, St. Steven's
Monastery is now home to a community of
31 nuns
who are up at 5:00 a.m. every day for
prayer and their daily rituals.
The ancient Greeks had gods for
practically everything. When Greece was
absorbed into the Roman Empire, they
began to whittle them down. And over
time, the country fully embraced the
Orthodox Church with just one God, which
still plays a big role in Greek life
today.
But St. Stevens isn't just a place of
prayer. This is a vault for centuries
worth of sacred texts, too. Carved into
the rock beneath, there is a museum
packed with religious treasures and
ancient manuscripts. And I'm here to
find one in particular.
My guide is Sister Nicoti. She spent 30
years in this monastery and knows every
treasure hidden within.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Tucked away here are 154 manuscripts,
some dating back to the 11th century.
Painstaking copies made by the monks who
once called this place home. And in
pride of place sits the one I'm looking
for.
a full edition of Aristotle's works. The
Greek philosopher who basically wrote
the manual on scientific thought, asking
questions, testing theories and using
logic to make sense of the world. So, it
does make you wonder what's his work
doing here alongside orthodox religious
texts. the ancient Greeks to me are
like,
you know, Aristotle, Plato, all those
guys to me are like my my heroes. But
what I've been trying to do is try and
understand how ancient Greece and modern
Greece fit together, these kind of ideas
that Aristotle worked on and Catholicism
feel very far apart. What happened here?
Why was it so different here?
Philosophers.
Mathemat
Orthodox monks were more than just men
of faith. They were also scholars. And
during the period of Ottoman rule from
the 15th to the early 19th century when
Greek culture was under threat, it was
the church that protected and preserved
it. The Greeks have this very unique
relationship then between rational
scientific philosophical thoughts and
religion. I mean the two are sort of
combined together.
Have you studied these then yourself?
>> Not all of this, but
hang on a minute. Could you speak
English this whole time?
Clearly, I'm not to be trusted with the
monastery's more delicate secrets. But
what I have been let in on is something
much bigger. The way science and
religion coexist here, not as rivals,
but co-conspirators in the search for
meaning. So, I've always had this
worldview that there are like two
parallel universes. So, on the one hand,
you've got the real world, which is
messy and ugly and complicated. And then
kind of lying underneath that, you've
got the mathematical universe. And this
is beautiful and pure and divine. And
you know, the ancient Greeks and and the
Orthodox Church, they sort of see things
in the same way. It's just they think
it's literally divine rather than just
metaphorically. And so maybe our beliefs
aren't actually quite so different after
all. Which does make me wonder if I've
just actually been on a pilgrimage this
entire time.
The monks and nuns of Meteora are quiet
custodians of Greek culture, keeping it
alive for future generations.
But what about the people inheriting
that legacy in a country so defined by
ancient greatness? What is it like to
live in the shadow of all of that
history? On the final leg of my journey,
I'm looking for the modern Greek
identity. Preferably somewhere with
fewer philosophers and a bit more chaos.
If there's one thing I've learned so
far, it's that being Greek comes with a
pretty overwhelming legacy. So now I
want to see what happens when all of
that weight of history meets something a
little more unexpected.
I've come to Galaxy, a coastal town with
postcard views and a festival that
promises to be part heritage, part
chaos, and entirely unforgettable.
Except right now it feels a bit more
ghost town than carnival.
There is a festival that takes place
across Greece every year. One that dates
back to the days of worshiping Dian
Isis, the god of fun. And this town of
Galaxi has its own take on the festival
that has been going for a couple of
hundred years. And um believe me when I
tell you Dionis would approve.
Right now, the whole town is holed up at
home, preparing for what they proudly
and slightly ominously call the flower
war.
>> Luckily, I've been taken under the wing
of local Galaxian Urugos.
>> Go on, go crazy.
>> With help from his son, Andreas, I'm
getting battle ready.
>> Step one, smear yourself with flour
mixed with colored pigment. Naturally,
this tradition dates back to Galaxy's
glory days in the 18th century when it
was a booming shipb building town. Back
then, the whole town would turn out to
send sailors off in style. Faces dusted
with flower, spirits high, and just
enough anarchy to qualify as a proper
sendoff.
Then came the age of the steamboat. The
shipyards fell silent, and Galaxi became
the sleepy coastal town it is today. But
once a year that silence is shattered.
The town wakes up, grabs the flower, and
throws itself back into history one
fistful at a time.
>> So, do you remember going as a little
boy as well?
This must be really nice having
grandfather, father and son all
together.
I agree with you completely.
>> Generations of Galaxians have fought to
keep their town story alive, passing the
tradition down through families. But
beneath the flower and the face paint
lies an even older tale, a thread that
stretches back to ancient Greece. Are
they family bells?
>> The wearing of sheep bells is a pagan
practice rooted in ancient Dionian
ritual celebrating fertility, rebirth,
and the transition of winter to spring.
So you know which sheep it is.
Today is a big day for four-year-old
Andreas. It's his very first flower wall
wearing his own bell.
>> And you get one.
>> A small one from the family goat, but
it's a big step in joining the family
tradition.
He He'd better not lose one then, right?
Yorgus and his family aren't trying to
relive the past. They're just continuing
the tradition with a cloud full of
colorful flower.
And as thousands of people gather on the
edge of town, it's clear that this
festival has grown way beyond a mere
local custom.
They told me I was coming to film some
ancient Greek traditions. This is uh
this is not exactly what I had in mind.
>> Let's go.
Now,
>> when you think about it, the themes
don't really change that much over time,
right? YOU'VE GOT WAR, YOU'VE GOT GODS,
you've got love, you've got death.
>> I have to tell you, this isn't my usual
scene. I like things with a bit of
structure. You know, mild control over
my surroundings. But this, on the other
hand, is chaos. It's a mashup of ancient
ritual and local history stitched
together into something that is loud and
messy and somehow still speaks to Greeks
today.
You've got old people, you've got young
people. It's like everyone is here and
yet somehow it works.
>> My father claims that he's the oldest
one at 75.
>> Yeah. How does it compare to Christmas
or to Easter? Like do you look forward
to this day?
>> If you put aside the Orthodox holiday,
it's more important for the local
people.
>> Oh, close your mouth because you have
you have something coming.
>> Back in ancient Greece, festivals were
more than just an excuse for a party.
They were how people made sense of who
they were. Shared stories and rituals
were what stitched those scattered city
states together into what we now know as
Greece. And that tradition still lives
on, passed down through families to make
sure that the story doesn't end with
them.
I think when I first got here, I saw
Greece as sort of disjointed, right?
You've got like the ancients and then
you've got the people today. And those
felt disconnected somehow.
But actually thinking about it, I
realized there are these threads that
are consistently there all through time.
You've got the pathonon of course.
You've got ancient Greek mathematics.
You've got the olive tree. You've got
the life on the sea. And perhaps Greece
isn't the trailblazer it once was. Or
maybe it's just that the rest of the
world finally caught up. Radical thought
became the mainstream. Either way, the
Greeks have every reason to celebrate a
legacy that didn't just shape history,
it set the bar for it.